feat: add dataLoader instrumentation configuration to server (#1423)
ExpediaGroup/graphql-kotlin: website/docs/server/data-loader/data-loader-instrumentation.md

---
id: data-loader-instrumentation
title: Data Loader Instrumentations
---

`graphql-kotlin-dataloader-instrumentation` is set of custom [Instrumentations](https://www.graphql-java.com/documentation/instrumentation/)
that will calculate when is the right moment to dispatch `KotlinDataLoader`s across single and batch GraphQL operations.

These custom instrumentations follow the similar approach as the default [DataLoaderDispatcherInstrumentation](https://github.com/graphql-java/graphql-java/blob/master/src/main/java/graphql/execution/instrumentation/dataloader/DataLoaderDispatcherInstrumentation.java)
from `graphql-java`, the main difference is that regular instrumentations apply to a single `ExecutionInput` aka [GraphQL Operation](https://www.graphql-java.com/documentation/execution#queries),

> whereas these custom instrumentations applies to multiple GraphQL operations (say a BatchRequest) and stores its state in the `GraphQLContext`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whereas these custom instrumentations apply to multiple GraphQL operations (say a BatchRequest) and store their state in the `GraphQLContext`.
```

allowing batching and deduplication of transactions across those multiple GraphQL operations.

The `graphql-kotlin-dataloader-instrumentation` module contains 2 custom `DataLoader` instrumentations:

1. **DataLoaderLevelDispatchedInstrumentation**

>    Dispatches all data loaders when a certain **Level** when a certain **Level**of all **ExecutionInputs** sharing a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Dispatches all data loaders when a certain **Level** of all **ExecutionInputs** sharing a
```

field dispatches, it will check if all fields across all operations for a particular level were dispatched and if the condition is met,
it will dispatch all the data loaders.

### Example

**Queries**

```graphql
query Q1 {
    astronaut(id: 1) { # async
        id
        name
        missions { # async
            id
            designation
        }
    }
}

query Q2 {
    astronaut(id: 2) { # async
        id
        name
        missions { # async
            id
            designation
        }
    }
}
```

**Execution diagram**

![Image of data loader level dispatched instrumentation](../../assets/data-loader-level-dispatched-instrumentation.png)

* The `astronaut` `DataFetcher` uses a `AstronautDataLoader` which will be dispatched when **Level 1** of those 2 operations
  is dispatched, causing the `AstronautDataLoader` to load 2 astronauts.
* The `missions` `DataFetcher` uses a `MissionsByAstronautDataLoader` which will be dispatched when **Level 2** of those 2 operations
  is dispatched, causing the `MissionsByAstronautDataLoader` to load 2 lists of missions by astronaut.

> ### Usage on spring server

Reviewer: I think we should provide docs on integration outside of spring server (there could be a note below saying that our spring support simplifies the above setup and you can use this simple yaml configuration to enable it). Guess you don't need to specify the complete schema setup part -> main part is to highlight that this instrumentation requires population of GraphQL context map with the state (this comment applies to both instrumentations).

i.e. something along the lines

===
In order to enable batching by level, you need to configure your GraphQL instance with the `DataLoaderLevelDispatchedInstrumentation`

```kotlin
val graphQL = GraphQL
    .instrumentation(DataLoaderLevelDispatchedInstrumentation())
    // configure schema, type wiring, etc.
    .build()
```

This data loader instrumentation relies on a global state object that should be stored in the GraphQL context map

```kotlin
val graphQLContext = mapOf(
    KotlinDataLoaderRegistry::class to kotlinDataLoaderRegistry,
    SyncExecutionExhaustedState::class to ExecutionLevelDispatchedState(queries.size)
)
```

:::info
`graphql-kotlin-spring-server` provides convenient integration of batch loader functionality through simple configuration. Batching instrumentation can be enabled by configuring following properties

```yaml
graphql:
  batching:
   enabled: true
   strategy: LEVEL_DISPATCHED
```
:::
